The digital revolution was a dinner party but its afterglow is not. The once utopian promises of high-definition audiovisuals, real-time electronic communication and infinite storage possibilities are just some of the digital culture perspectives that are now widely disseminated. At the same time as these phenomena are still shrouded in the glossy aesthetics of the digital, their tarnished appeal cannot be denied in a world where 'big data' is also the 'big brother' of mass surveillance and where the 'cloud' is made of the metals and minerals of the 'earth' on which data centers are built. Far from immaterial and neutral, our post-digital culture is one where tech is deeply embedded in the geophysical and geopolitical. This is evident at the significant 'other sites' of digital culture such as e-waste dumps, mines, mass-digitisation companies and security agencies. transmediale 2014 proposes the post-digital moment of 'afterglow' as a diagnosis of the current status of the digital hovering between 'trash and treasure'. afterglow conjures up the ambivalent state of digital culture, where what seems to remain from the digital revolution is a paradoxical nostalgia for the futuristic high-tech it once promised us but that is now crumbling in our hands. The challenge that this moment poses is how to use that state of post-digital culture between trash and treasure as a still not overdetermined space from which to invent new speculative thought and practice. Are there means of renewal in the excess, overflow and waste products of the digital afterglow?

A distributed programme of events leading up to the transmediale and CTM festivals - Take the opportunity to experience some of Berlin's best experimental arts, interventions, music and sound in this unique pre-festival programme! transmediale and CTM's Vorspiel is a programme of distributed partner events, where a variety of partner venues invite local and international audiences to a series of exhibition openings, performances, interventions, artist talks and special events across the city of Berlin.

Vilém Flusser Resident 2013 Pinar Yoldas shows An Ecosystem of Excess at the Project Space of the Ernst Schering Foundation. Schizophrenia 2.0 at .CHB presents the work of young Taiwanese new media artists. At SUPERMARKT, future past – past future probes the relationship between past, present and future in Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey. Douglas Coupland exhibits works at Or Gallery, and holds the Marshall McLuhan Lecture 2014 at the Embassy of Canada. Our partner festival CTM takes place at different venues across Berlin under the title Dis Continuity.

What does it mean to speak about digital culture today, and what are the implications of the term post-digital? The conference takes afterglow as a metaphor for the present condition of digital culture, examining the geopolitical, infrastructural and bodily consequences of the excessive digitisation that has taken place over the course of the last three decades. These topics have been divided into three streams that each reflect a different aspect of digital culture in the afterglow: An Afterglow of the Mediatic, chaired by Jussi Parikka and Ryan Bishop of the Winchester School of Art, focuses on the materiality of the digital from a geopolitical and geophysical perspective; Hashes to Ashes, chaired by Tatiana Bazzichelli, reflects on the strategic infrastructure of the digital and the backdoors behind the glossy surface of connectivity; Will you be my TRASHURE?, chaired by Francesco Warbear Macarone Palmieri and Katrien Jacobs, speaks about the body of the digital, and its implication on identity, sexuality and pleasure as a way to reflect on politics and culture.

The films and videos featured in transmediale 2014 focus on subjects such as the internet, surveillance, and Big Data as well as electronic, digital and analogue trash. The afterglow theme is seen as gloomy visions of the afterlife of images and technologies in which naïve dreams of a digital revolution, free exchange and equal participation no longer have a place. Instead, surveillance cameras film seamless state-ordered murders, video games reflect the nuclear contamination of the countryside, and e-waste and spirituality combine to create postcolonial revenge. The countless images that we continuously produce grant us an imaginary eternity that even pharaohs couldn’t dream of. In the programme, more central still than the images of society’s waste are the images of society as waste that have been artfully processed in the works. A total of fifty-three films, videos and slide shows from 1931 to 2013 are to be shown in eight programmes and seven installations, each programme with its own sub-theme. For the first time in the history of transmediale we are showing original, handmade films created from lost and re-composited images, the only film genre with no counterpart in the digital world.

transmediale's performance programme focuses on audiovisual and intermedial pieces that defy any strict genre categorisation. At the core of the 2014 programme are performances that convey the experiential side of the afterglow thematic: performance works after the digital where the technology deployed is not the main focus but rather the often intangible spaces between humans, objects and systems. As always, a number of highlight performances are presented in cooperation with CTM festival. Despite a diversity of approaches, the works performed by Lucky Dragons, Dinos Chapman, and Robert Henke all display a sensitivity to inter-media performance, which speaks to both CTM's Dis Continuity and transmediale's afterglow themes. Simultaneously referencing composition, science, and the legacies of electronic music, video art, and visual music, the performances take audiovisual performance beyond the inertia of VJ-style After Effects to a post-digital revolution aesthetic of ambivalence between analogue and digital and the improvised and the pre-defined. Both festivals aim to transgress boundaries of art, science, and popular culture. Thus, the cooperation programme presents strong artistic positions which are post-digital as much as they are intermedial.

Sylvie Earle, explorer and oceanographer, says Earth is a misnomer and the planet should be called the Ocean. Oceans are the life support system of the planet as well as its salty wombs. The ancient ocean, the primordial soup, gave birth to the very first organic molecules and was brimming with prehistoric living organisms. That was four billion years ago. Today the composition of oceans is undergoing a dramatic change where synthetic molecules are taking over. Anthropogenic waste has filled our oceans in less than two decades. A striking site in this respect is the Great Pacific Garbage Patch. Covering between 700 000 and 15 million km², the site is a monument to plastic waste on a global scale. Referring to Kantian aesthetics, it is a truly 'sublime' kinetic sculpture built by all the nations around the Pacific Ocean through many years of mindless, unsustainable consumption. As environmental activist and discoverer of the Trash Vortex Captain Charles Moore boldly claims, “the ocean has turned into a plastic soup.”

From primordial soup to plastic soup, An Ecosystem of Excess asks a very simple question: “If life started today in our plastic debris filled oceans, what kinds of life forms would emerge out of this contemporary primordial ooze?
The project introduces pelagic insects, marine reptilia, fish and birds endowed with organs to sense and metabolise plastics as a new Linnean order of post-human life forms, Inspired by the groundbreaking findings of new bacteria that burrows into pelagic plastics, An Ecosystem of Excess envisions life forms of greater complexity, life forms that can thrive in man-made extreme environments, life forms that can turn the toxic surplus of our capitalistic desire into eggs, vibrations and joy.
Starting from excessive anthropocentrism An Ecosystem of Excess reaches anthropo-de-centrism, by offering life without mankind.
